# The Regulatory Mechanisms and Biological Implications of Protein Complex Assembly

PhD Thesis

Jonathan Wells

University of Edinburgh, 2017

## Lay Summary
All cells are made up of a complex mixture of biological macromolecules,
including carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Proteins, the subject of this
thesis, are tiny, vibrating strings of amino acids with a strictly defined
sequence and three-dimensional structure. Every cell in your body, of which
there are some 50 trillion, contains further trillions of proteins that,
collectively, are responsible for carrying out virtually every biological
process you can imagine, from the moment you are born, to the moment you die.

However, although each protein is present in many copies in the cell, the full
set of unique protein species is comparatively small. What is more, the number
of protein-coding genes that an organism has bears almost no relationship to the
perceived complexity of that organism. For a humbling illustration of this,
consider the fact that your genome - that of a human - contains approximately
20,000 genes, whereas the pufferfish contains closer to 50,000 and even the
lowly banana has more than 36,000. What is it then about this collection of
genes that allows us to contemplate the difference between our selves and a
banana, whilst the banana just lies there, fruitily?

Part of the explanation stems from the fact that proteins interact extensively
with one another. Across the entire proteome (the collection of all proteins
present in a cell), a substantial fraction of proteins form stable complexes.
Haemoglobin, for example, is made up of two alpha and two beta globin subunits.
Without the tendency of proteins such as the globins to interact, the level of
complexity that we see across the spectrum of life - even in the simplest
microorganisms - would never be possible. However, we know very much less about
these protein complexes than we do about their constituent subunits. In
particular, we only have a basic understanding of how the cell regulates their
assembly, ensuring that proteins are produced at the right time and in the right
place.

In this work, I have attempted to explain why protein complexes matter, looking
at some of the ways in which the cell enables complexes to assemble, and what
the biological implications of this process are. For example, from studying the
organisation of bacterial genes, it is clear that the order in which their genes
are encoded closely matches the order in which the resulting protein complexes
assemble. This implies that these creatures must be under strong evolutionary
pressure to assemble protein complexes quickly and efficiently.

Concerning human biology, the later chapters describe a model of protein complex
behaviour that explains some of the features that we see in aneuploid cells -
that is, cells which have an abnormal number of chromosomes. This is a state
familiar to many of us as Down's syndrome, in which people affected have an
extra copy of chromosome 21. In closing, the work presented here, supported by
that of many others, demonstrates the fundamental importance of protein
complexes to life, and I hope goes some way to deepening our understanding of
their behaviour within cells.

## Notes

~35,000 words

~45 figures

The tex files supplied here won't compile, at least not without errors, since I
haven't provided the raw figure files. If you would like them then get in touch
and I'll send them your way. You would also need to fix the paths to the .bib
file referred to in the headers of each .tex file.


